Hey everyone. Today we are going to look
at intro to audio processing or more
specifically how we work with audio to
train neural networks. We're not going
to look at neural networks today. We're
mostly going to look at that
pre-processing step of how do we get
audio ready to actually pass it into a
neural architecture. Working with audio
is quite a bit different from working
with images or text. So that's why I
want to make this video. And also we're
going to just look at a high level how
to use the torch audio package and how
the different methods are related to
each other. In future videos we'll go in
and actually look at some of the theory
and implement these u methods from
scratch. So today is mostly just a use
case a practical use case of what's
going on. So let's go ahead. Of course
if we're going to be working with audio
we need some audio to work with. So
let's do that. Uh numpy as np import
mapplot live.py pie plot as PLT and
there's going to be a lot of copy
pasting today because I mostly want to
show visuals and y'all don't need to see
me uh write code of making different
visuals but our main goal is to
understand the torch audio package at
least some of the main uh methods that
exist in it for us to um use in the
future. So we're going to import torch
audio.transforms
sd. This is just like your torch
vision.transforms but it's for audio and
then import i python.d display. Um, and
we're going to do from
ipython display import audio. And
that'll let us actually visualize um or
play back one of the audio files. And so
I already have an audio file in here um
that I' that I've gone ahead and saved.
So we're just going to take a look at
that. And so our audio file is going to
be for some audio
um and it's going to return both the
audio and the sampling rate. And that's
going to be torch torch audio.load. And
we're going to go ahead and load our
sample audio. flack. There we go. So,
that's going to be our audio file. And
the audio file will sound like this.
Audio. We want to play back this audio.
And the rate is going to be the sampling
rate.
And it should sound something like a
distinct promise of 100 pounds was made
to him if he would have the child ready
to hand over, right? Just some standard
speech audio file. So, first of all, if
you've never heard of this term sampling
rate before, the sampling rate is how
many samples per second does your
microphone capture. basically how many
numbers are we using to represent the
audio. So in this case if we look at
audio audio is basically just a list of
numbers. It's a it's a number that
changes over time. So it's kind of like
a time series uh data set. And the
sampling rate is how many samples do I
have in every second of audio. So I have
about 8 seconds worth of audio here. And
the sampling rate of this file
specifically is 16,000. So, the sampling
rate depends on the sensor or the
microphone you're using to capture the
audio. Higher quality microphones will
have higher sampling rates because
they're able to capture um more
information in every second of audio.
Now, the sampling rate is important and
we'll talk about it later, but for now
um for most neural architectures, we use
about 16,000 uh seems to be the standard
sampling rate for most architectures out
there. more modern ones and bigger
models might use a slightly higher one
like 20,000, 22,000, 24,000. Um, and
we'll talk about why that's important in
a bit. And so that's our sampling rate.
Now, typically when you look at audio,
um, you see it in this form, plt.plot
audio, and this will go ahead and create
a nice little, um, plot. Oh, yes, I
remember. So our audioshape
notice there's it's a one by something.
So plot's just trying to plot everything
individually. That's unne unneeded. Um
so we can do audios squeeze. And now
this should work out fine. There we go.
So this is our plot of a waveform over
time. Right? So it's it's basically
sound pressure over time. That's what
the that's what the microphones capture.
Um and this is a standard figure you'll
see when working with any kind of audio
file. And this is known as the time
domain of our signal because it's some
value that's varying over time. Right?
This is the time axis and this is
basically our air pressure, right? The
amount of air pressure axis.
Now, this is a totally fine view of our
audio, but typically this isn't the most
helpful. Sometimes we're interested in
the frequencies available inside an
audio file. What do I mean by that? If
you have taken a signal processing class
before, you will have heard of the 4year
transform. If you've never heard of this
before, go ahead and watch the three
blue one brown video. It will visualize
it way better than I could ever write
it. But the main idea is you want to
find out what are the frequencies that
exist inside this um audio file. And
we're going to take a look at a couple
of easy examples. The way I like to
think about it is light um light is a
frequency. Different colors of lights
have different frequencies. So if you
take red light and you take uh blue
light and you take green light, every
single light has a different frequency.
Now if I take two different um colors
like blue and yellow and mix them
together and get green, I can see that I
have green light. But if I want to undo
it and figure out what are the different
colors that went into it, that's finding
the individual frequencies that when
mixed together create that green light.
And so a 4year transform goes in the
opposite direction. It will take my
green paint and undo it figuring out
what are the individual frequencies
found inside that green paint. In this
case, blue and yellow. And so this is
done by basically um multiplying your
signal by some complex exponential. I'm
not going to go into any of the main
ideas here, but it gives you a complex
number that essentially represents the
amount of energy at different
frequencies, K. So let's go ahead and
see what that looks like in in practice.
So let's first talk about frequency. You
have heard of frequency before because
this is something you'll see in standard
um you know calculus or pre-calculus
courses or trigonometry course. What we
have here is a sinosoid at different
frequencies. So we have a one hertz
signal and so that means we have one
cycle per second. That's going to be in
one second of audio we have one complete
cycle as you can see with the blue line.
Similarly if we have four hertz that
means four cycles per second. So that
means we have four complete cycles in 1
second. That's the orange line. And
similarly again the green would be
eight. Now one thing I want to mention
is this hertz cycles per second is
different from this sampling rate which
is samples per second. samples per
second is how many samples or numbers
were captured to, you know, produce this
line. In this case, I have 1,000
numbers, 1,00 samples between 0 and one.
So, I have 1,000 samples for 1 second.
So, this would be a 1,00 samples per
second um audio file. That's my sampling
rate. On the other hand, we have one
hertz. That's the cycle. So, the cycle
cycles per second is about what's being
captured. a low cycles per second is low
frequency audio. So that's like very low
pitched audio. And then you have um high
frequency audio. That would be much
higher frequency audio, right? Higher
frequency audio. And so that's the way
to think about there. There's two
different frequencies going on. There is
a relationship between them called the
Nyquis rate that we'll talk about in
just a bit. But just keep that in mind
so you don't get them confused. So we
have here cycles per second. And our
goal is to be able to identify what is
the frequency the cycles per second of a
sinosoid. And the foryear transform
provides that to us. And so let's go
ahead and see what that looks like. Um
again, lot of copy pasting here, but
let's just go ahead and add you in first
and then we'll do the rest of it. So
what I've done is created uh 10 1,000
points between 0 and one. So that's t,
right? Right, we have 1,000 points here
between time zero all the way up to uh
non-inclusive time 1. So there we go.
And what I'm saying is I want a sinosoid
with a frequency of 20. Okay, no
problem. We can do y is equal to np
sign. And this is your standard sinosoid
formula. 2 * pi np.pi
times your frequency that you want times
the time. Right? This is your standard
formula. So if you do plt.plot plot y,
you'll end up seeing in 1,000 samples,
we have 20 um 20 basically 20
repetitions, right? 20 full cycles
happening. And here it is in the
sampling rate view, right? We have 1,000
samples or we can do it in the time
view. And that's going to be if we do t,
y, that's going to be in 1 second, we
have 20 different cycles happening. So
just some things to keep in mind. And
our goal is to find out what is the uh
4year transform of this and what does
the 4year transform provide us? What
kind of information do we learn from it?
So if we do y fft, it's going to be np.
FFT. FFT. So this is the standard numpy
fast 4year transform that we can look
at. So FFT and we're going to take the
4year transform of Y. And when we look
at Y FFT, what we see is we get a bunch
of these complex numbers. And what do I
mean by complex numbers? Well, it has a
real term. So you can see it's 1.2 e to
the4. So basically zero plus a complex
term, right? Because you can see there's
this j attached there. So these are your
standard complex numbers in the form of
a plus uh bj, right? So complex numbers.
And this provides us how much energy and
the phase. So there's a magnitude and a
phase component which we'll talk about
in a bit. But just for now, it's
essentially how much energy is available
at this frequency component. How much
energy is in this frequency component?
How much energy is in this frequency
component? And the question you may be
asking is, well, these are energies, but
what frequencies do they represent? So,
what is the frequency of this one? What
is the frequency of this one? Dot dot
dot. And so, we can easily compute that
or we can just use one of the built-in
functions from from numpy freaks
frequencies is going to be np. FFT. FFT
and it's going to be and this is going
to be FFT frequency. And all it needs is
to know uh what is the uh how many
samples do we have in our um thing. And
then we can say d equals the the time
between samples. It's just going to be
uh how much time at t1 minus t0. And we
know that there's 8,000 samples. So this
would be 1 over 1,000, right? The
distance between the two. So we could
have also done that.
Yeah, there we go. So these are my
frequencies. I have frequency zero. So
basically zero cycles per second, one
cycle per second, two cycles per second,
three cycle per second, dot dot dot. And
we know our signal, the original signal
that we applied the FFT to has 20 cycles
per second. So we're expecting something
special to happen here. And so we'll see
that in just a bit. And so these are my
frequencies.
You can also see we have both positive
frequencies. We also have these negative
frequencies, right?
96, 97, -20, dot dot dot. And negative
frequencies are not all that interesting
to us. So we'll see what that looks like
in just a bit.
And so um actually we can let's just go
ahead and plot it. PLT.plot. If we plot
our let's just go ahead. So um let's
just look at it right here. We have here
um our complex numbers, right? Each
complex exponential is just it creates a
complex number of a plus jb. And this
complex value has two things. It has a
magnitude and a phase. And the magnitude
is what we really care about. It's the
energy at which uh the amount of energy
at that specific uh frequency. But the
phase is basically what we have right
here, right? The the the angle itself.
Um so every complex number always has a
magnitude component and a phase
component. um we don't really care about
the phase um all that much right now,
but it basically tells us the shift of
that frequency component. So let's just
take a look and see what it what it
does. So if we do plt.plot and we plot
our on our x-axis let's plot our
frequencies. So freaks
and on our yaxis let's plot our um
actual um values the complex values but
we can't plot a complex value. So we can
plot the absolute value of it. This will
provide automatically the magnitude. So
if you doabs
on complex numbers and numpy, it'll
basically go ahead and do this. If you
did angle, it would provide you the
phase, but that's fine. Um,
oh, right,
not abs. NP.ABS. There we go.
Right. So, we can see that we have all
of these frequencies available to us. We
can see it kind of goes from 500 to
500ish and we have these two peaks,
right? A spike here and a spike here.
The thing is that we don't really care
about negative frequencies. It's just
that when we produ when we do the
foryear transform, every positive
frequency from our complex numbers,
every positive frequency identified also
has its negative complex conjugate.
Right? That's just the way that foyer
transforms work. Everything comes in
pairs. There's a complex conjugate. we
just don't care about the negative side.
So, we can just ignore them, right?
Let's just ignore them. So, we only want
the frequencies that are the positive
ones. So, let's go ahead and change that
to only show the positive ones. So, that
would be um
it'll be from
let's just index them. It'll start in
the middle. So, we basically need to
start from the middle. So, that's going
to be the len of frequencies divided by
two. And then similarly, it's going to
be the uh len of frequencies divided by
two. And so now we have our only the
positive section, the positive
frequencies. And notice that we have a
spike at about 20 hertz, right? And we
have no other energy at any other cycles
per second. And that's because the
signal we applied this 4year transform
to was a 20 hertz signal, 20 samples per
second. And so we're able to identify
what is the overall frequency of this
specific signal. And which is pretty
neat, right? We're able to kind of
extract that information. And so now
that we have that, there is one
limitation. And this is what I'm talking
about. The relationship between the
sampling rate, the samples per second
that your microphone captures and your
signal rate, the cycles per second,
right? The frequencies that the
microphone is capturing. And the main
idea is that if your samples per second
is let's say 1,000 like we've had it up
till now. So your microphone is
capturing 1,000 numbers every second.
The maximum number of cycles per second
that your audio can represent is only
500. So it's always half. So your
frequency of a signal is always
represented. The max that it can
represent is half the sampling rate. And
so this is helpful but it does lead to
some issues. So the reason this matters
first of all is that your human uh human
hearing can hear up to about 20,000ish
hertz. Right? So 20,000 cycles per
second is the highest pitch that we can
understand. This means that our audio
files need to be at least 40,000 samples
per second, right? Samples per second.
So, our microphones need to be able to
capture 40,000 samples every second to
contain all of that information. Because
if our microphone's capturing 40,000
samples per second, then the highest
frequency that that microphone can
represent that that audio can represent
would be 20,000 samples per sec uh
20,000 cycles per second because that's
half. So, that's the important part.
Now, that is a theoretical limit because
it's never perfect. So if we have 40,000
samples per second, we can technically
represent up to 20,000 cycles per
second, but it's not perfect. So that's
why typically you'll see 44,100
samples per second um in high quality
microphones, right? That that's kind of
why because it gives you a little bit of
buffer room over the kind of the perfect
Nyquis rate. And so now that we have all
of this, we can go ahead and take a look
at a common problem known as aliasing.
So aliasing happens when we downsample
audio. And this happens all the time
when you're working with um data. For
example, let's say that you are working
with um some audio that has high
frequency information. Let's say the
audio has um and let's go ahead and
write it out so it makes sense. Let's
say you're working with audio that has
um 10,000
uh and it's going to be cycle per
second. So, this is my high frequency
information.
And let's say I captured it pretty well
at uh let's say I was recording with
24,000
um 24,000
sample
per second. So, if I'm capturing at
24,000 samples per second by the Nyquist
rule, right, Nyquist,
I will be able to represent up to 12,000
cycle
per second. So, that's good, right? I'm
able to represent um up to 12,000, which
is no problem because if the max, right,
if I know the maximum is 10,000, no big
deal. We are able to capture all of that
audio information, all of that frequency
information with this sampling rate. So,
we're good to go. Now, what I said was
that neural networks are typically
trained on 16,000 samples per second,
right? Like wave tovec will be one of
the architectures we look at. It's
trained on 16,000 samples per second,
which means we need to do a down
sampling, right? Down sample. And this
down sample is the same as if you start
with an image, right? So if you've
worked with images, um let's say you
start with uh imageet images that are
256x 256. That's an imageet image. And
then but we know our neural network
takes 224 x 224. 224x
224. we end up losing a little bit of
resolution because we're downsampling
the image. Um, downsampling in an image
has the exact same Nyquis properties,
but we don't really think about it u
when we do it in images as much. But we
have the same problem here in audio.
We're going to take this 24,000 samples
per second, and we're going to end up um
taking the and we're going to downsample
it to 16,000 uh 16,000 samples
per second.
But now if we do Nyquist again, Nyquist,
this the maximum thing that my 16,000
samples per second can represent would
be 8,000
8,000 cycles per second.
And we have a problem because in my
original audio of 24,000 samples per
second with my 12,000 max, I was covered
because I know 10,000 was the most in my
data. But now that I've downsampled my
audio from 24,000 to 16,000, the max I
can represent is 8,000, which is
underneath the 10,000 that I need. So
this 10,000 basically all the frequency
information, all the frequency
information between 8,000 to 10,000
hertz that was in my original audio will
get aliased. Aliased.
And so you end up losing that frequency
information because your signal just
can't contain it anymore. So it has to
go somewhere and so it gets aliased
down. And so let's go ahead and take a
look at what that looks like.
Um so what we're going to do is we're
going to create a audio file or
basically a sinosoid just like we did
before.
And what we have here is a and this
would be 200. We have a 200 samples per
second audio. Right? Right? So if it's
200 samples per second, I know the
maximum thing I can represent is 100
cycles per second. So I know it's 100,
but I pick 40. So 40 is under 100. So
we're good to go. So I go ahead and
create that sinosoid. And what we're
going to do is just apply the forer
transform to it just like we did
earlier. Nothing new. So we're going to
go ahead and provide the forer
transform. Same everything same as
before. Nothing new. And now what we're
going to do is down sample the audio.
Right? We're going to down sample. So
we're going to do a down samp down down
sample factor. It's going to be let's
say a factor of four. Yeah, let's do a
factor of four. So that means we're
going to go from 200 hertz down sampled
by a factor of four. So it' be 50 Hz. So
we have 50 samples per second. But if we
have only 50 samples per second, so this
is going to be 50 sample per second.
Which means that the maximum cycles per
second that I can represent is half.
That'd be 25 cycle per second.
The problem is 25 cycles per second is
less than the 40 that I have in my
original audio, right? The original
signal. So let's see what happens to
that. So what we're going to do is
downsample our audio. That's just going
to be um t low is going to be equal to
t high. So we're going to down sample
both my uh time. So we're going to take
every other time step and our data
itself
t high and we're going to do down sample
factor. Right? We're going to skip every
step. And then similarly we're going to
do y low is going to be and this is why
basically low is down sample. It's just
going to be the y high again
down sample factor. Right? So I've gone
ahead and downsampled everything by a
factor of four. And then just like
before, we're going to go ahead and
apply our foryear transform to the down
sample data. Right? So go ahead and
apply the for transform, get the
frequencies of the down sample data. So
there we go. And now let's go ahead and
plot it. So again, I'm not going to make
you watch me create some plotting
functions. So here's my original signal
I had. Um, and this shouldn't be 80
hertz. This should be 40 Hz. My bad.
There we go. 40 Hz. So I have 40 cycles
happening in 1 second. But because I
downsampled my signal by a factor of
four, now you can see we have 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9 10. 10 cycles happening in the
same amount of time because we've
downsampled directly by a factor of
four. And here's the aliasing effect. I
had a signal that originally had energy
at 40 hertz. Now that my down sample
signal can no longer represent that
information, it gets aliased down. So we
can only rep that 40 Hz frequency gets
aliased down to here instead. And so
this is you losing that frequency
information. And why it's really
important to keep in mind what are the
general frequencies that your audio is
working that your audio contains and
make sure that when you do any kind of
downsampling of your signal that you
still maintain that information in
there. So these are just kind of good
ideas to keep in mind. Now what would be
interesting here is what if we change
our downsampling factor to two. If we
change to two, that means we're going to
go from 200 hertz, right? 200 samples
per second. So if we do this to two,
that means we'll only go down to 100
samples per second, right? We're going
to go from 200 down to 100 because we've
only have which means the highest
frequency cycles per second we can
represent is half and that would be 50.
Luckily for us, 50 is greater than the
40 we were working with. So we should
see no aliasing happening now. So let's
see if that's true. And you can see
exactly that we lose some energy like
magnitude, but that same frequency is
still represented. So we haven't aliased
that information away.
Right? All right. Cool. So that that is
your main should be the main takeaway
about aliasing. So let's just keep
moving. Um, like I mentioned the at the
beginning, the whole point of a for
transform is to basically undo mixed
paint, right? And so what happens if you
take a couple of different signals with
three different frequencies? So we have
a sinosoid at five cycles per second, 20
cycles per second, 40 cycles per second,
and we just add those signals together
and then do the 4year transform. Well,
basically the same thing. Here's the sum
of your sinosoids. And the forer
transform is able to identify energy at
5 Hz, energy at 20 Hz, energy at 40 Hz,
right? So we're able to find those
frequencies here. Um if we add another
one, let's say we add one at 250, then
we'll end up with kind of a signal that
looks like this. But we have 5, 20, 40,
and then here we go. We have one
straight at 250. So the 4A transform
again is able to identify the energy at
the different frequencies available in
our signal. And so that's that's the fun
part. Now of course if we do a 4year
transform and the 4year transform goes
from the time domain signal where the
x-axis is time to the frequency domain
um which the x-axis is frequency. If we
can go in one way, then we should be
able to go the other way, right? The
inverse transform. And this is as simple
as just doing the inverse transform,
which I can just go ahead again. Um,
same code as before, adding together a
bunch of sinosoids, do the 4year
transform, but after you do the 4A
transform, do the FFT, inverse forear
transform. So, in the exact same way,
here you go. You have a signal, you take
its fouryear transform, and then you
take its inverse for a transform. And
these two signals should be identical to
each other. And there we go.
Now, here's the problem with a 4year
transform. And let's kind of think about
it this way. I'm going to apply the
forer transform to our actual audio. So,
if you remember up here, we had our
audio file. This audio file contains
lots of different frequencies, right?
Lots of different frequencies. And so,
what we want to do is apply the for
transform to this and just see what that
looks like. So, I called it audio. So,
that's what we're going to do. All we
want to do is basically this code right
here.
We're going to apply U
to our audio instead. So instead of the
sum of sinosoids, let's get rid of that.
We're going to do it on our
audio.
And T,
it's going to be len audio. And we know
that our audio sampled at 16,000 samples
per second. So the distance between time
or the you know is going to be one over
16,000.
And so we end up with and let's change u
to audio.
And there won't be a t here. This will
be range audio.
Uh oh right. We have to do list
range audio. Make sure it's an array.
Only integers of a single element can be
converted to an index
here. Let's
let's just do audio. Here we go. So we
have our audio file just like that. This
is our and this is no longer the sum of
syosoid. So these uh titles no longer
are correct. So let's get rid of that.
There we go. So this is the audio file
that we are working with. And here are
all of the frequencies that are
available in that audio file.
But this view is not actually all that
helpful to us. Like sure, we have the
frequencies, but notice that audio
files, unlike the signals we were
working with here, because this signal
here kind of repeats and it's, you know,
it's very repetitive. It's it's
periodic. The audio file, there's
clearly some change happening over time.
like in these areas like the you know
empty areas we have low frequ like
nothing's happening here so it's low
frequency in these areas there's lots of
change happening so this is a higher
frequency and because there's kind of
this mix of low and high frequencies and
things are changing over time we lose
that because in the regular 4year
transform we go from the time domain
squarely into the frequency domain like
it's a full conversion to the frequency
domain and the inverse for transform
goes backwards but is there any kind
middle ground that we can do where we
have both time and frequency
information. And yes, that's exactly
what we're going to do. This is known as
the spectrogram. And the spectrogram is
known as the it's basically like a
picture of the audio. And hopefully this
will make sense. Before we do it in
torch audio, we're going to go ahead and
do it in um in scypi because scypi will
provide again remember a 4year transform
provides us both the scroll back up just
to make sure it's a complex number
returns a complex number which means we
can get both the magnitude and the phase
information. Both of that's available to
us. It's just up till now like what
we're looking at here all of this stuff
is just the magnitude because typically
we just care about the magnitude. about
how much energy is there at the
different frequencies.
Either way, let's go ahead and take a
look at what this produces
when we apply the 4year transform. The
short time for transform. So, the short
time STF shorttime for transform
produces something known as the
spectrogram. And the spectrogram, we'll
talk about um a couple things in just a
bit, but it produces both the magnitude
and the phase. But notice here that
things are a little bit different where
we have a time and a frequency axis,
right? Time and a frequency axis.
Whereas opposed to before we just had
frequency or we just had time and we
just had the magnitude along, you know,
our our y-axis.
And so because we have time and
frequency axis, we can see both things
at the same time. We can see along this
time, you can see at the beginning part
here. So, let's look at the original
audio. At the beginning part here,
there's basically no information, right?
It's basically silent. Is that true? At
this beginning part here, notice that
there's no frequency information. Very
low frequency down here. But then once
talking actually begins, you can see a
spike happen here and some speaking
occurring. You can start to see some
frequencies being represented. And
honestly, what's more interesting is you
can see the changes in the different
frequencies. And what's extra cool is
there's a clear relationship between the
shapes of how these frequencies are
changing. Right? You can see here
there's a decrease. Here there's like an
increase and a decrease. Here there's
the different shapes of how these
frequencies occur and the phone names or
basically the phonetics of what's being
said. So um once you get really good uh
which I'm definitely not but once you
get really good like my professor can
look at this and give you an idea of
what's actually being said from just the
shapes of the frequencies which is
really neat. Um and so this is our
spectrogram magnitude but of course a
4year transform whether or not it's a
regular for transform short time for
transform whatever it may be gives us
two things. It gives us a magnitude plot
we can produce a magnitude and we can
produce the phase. It's just that as you
can see here, the phase doesn't there's
no discernable
uh structure in this image here. It
seems kind of like noise. I mean, it's
not. The phase is important, but it
doesn't really give us the information
that we're looking for. And that's why
typically when we're working with
spectrograms, we only deal with the
magnitude plot, the amount of energy at
the different frequencies at the
different times. And so that's the key
takeaway. That's why I use Cypi here
because in the torch audio they
basically just return this magnitude
spectrogram. They don't even return the
uh phase but Cypi gives us both of them
so we can take a look. Now what are the
things that you have to think about when
creating a spectrogram? There's two
things. There is the
number of samples per segment and then
the number of overlap. So first of all
in a spectrogram you have to it's still
doing a 4-year transform. It's just
doing it slightly differently. So if we
look at this audio here, what it's doing
is it's going to take a 4year transform
of instead of the entire signal at once,
it's going to take the 4year transform
of small chunks of the signal at a time.
And then for example, let's say we do a
um let's say our number of uh our our
length of the segment here it's 400.
Let's say it was 20 or let's say it's
20,000. That means I do the 4year
transform of the first 20,000 samples
only.
And then we have number of overlap. So
when we do the next chunk, if the
overlap was zero, then we do a 4 year
transform of 0 to 20,000, 20,000,
40,000, 40,000, 60,000, 60,000, 80,000,
dot dot dot. So we do a 4 year transform
on these different chunks of the audio.
And then we do a 4 year transform here
and we'll produce some type of a regular
for transform here. And this here
becomes one of our columns of this.
Basically, one of those bins. And we'll
see what those bins look like in just a
second. So, those are our bins.
And the interesting part is as you um as
you kind of reduce your trend, the the
length of these windows that we use, you
get different pieces of information. So,
there is a little bit more uh nuance to
this, like how do you window it? There's
hamming windows, hanning windows, stuff
like that. I'm not going to go into
those details today. You can find those
online and we'll look at them later when
we implement the shorttime forear
transform. But the main idea is we have
some audio that we're applying some um
forear transform to on different chunks
of it. The other key idea is we don't
just apply for transform to um different
chunks, but rather we do them to
slightly overlapping chunks and this is
meant for two main reasons. First it
gives a better representation u because
of the windowing process because if we
just apply a for transform to one chunk
of an audio you'll have a abrupt start
and an abrupt end. And this is why we'll
use something like a hamming window to
smooth it out. So I can pull a picture
of that up. A hamming window looks kind
of like this. Basically we take a
signal,
we take our signal that we're working
with. we take the chunk that we have and
we're going to multiply that chunk by
this hamming window. So the start of the
audio and the end of the audio is kind
of dampened out. Um and so it leads to
kind you know a bunch of cool properties
like here we go. If you have this signal
here and you apply this hamming window
you end up with kind of a uh a decayed
version of the signal kind of like this.
And this allows us to get smoother
properties uh smoother trans uh smoother
calculations of the 4year transform. So
that's one thing. But because we do
that, we end up having to do an overlap
add method. So when you do the inverse
shorttime for a transform, it uses a
method called overlap add. Um we're not
again not going to go into too much of
that today, but that requires some type
of an overlap. So instead of just saying
I want to do 0 to 20,000, 20,000 40,000,
you might have an overlap of 10,000. So
you'll do from 0 to 20,000. Then you'll
do from 10,000 to 30,000. Then you'll do
20,000 to 40,000. Then you'll do 30,000
to 50,000. So you'll have a 10,000
sample overlap between the different
4year transforms you're doing. So that's
neat. Now that we have that, let's go
ahead and look at the time frequency
relationship. What happens when I pick a
very large um size for this? So let's go
ahead and set it this way. Let's do our
window size. Right now it's 400.
And so this is going to be window size.
And our overlap is typically half the
size. So it doesn't have to be half, but
half is what you typically use. So we're
going to be doing half the window size
will be the overlap. So we'll do window
size divided by two. So this is what we
had so far, right? 400. Let's see what
happens when we increase it. Let's say
we make it um 10,000.
What do you notice here? We have very
good frequency resolution. Notice h how
many bins we go from zero to 8,000,
right? Our frequency resolution is quite
high, but it's kind of blurry. Like it's
stretched out because our time
resolution is pretty poor because each
bin is so large that you can see that
basically every bin takes up quite a
large chunk of time. So you have poor
time resolution because every window is
10,000 long, but very very good
frequency resolution, right? Very good
fre because we can see all of the
frequencies that are being represented
because that's that's just how we're
doing it. On the other hand, what
happens if we pick a very small window
size? Let's just say uh 16. We'll have
exactly the opposite problem. We're
going to have very good time resolution
because every 4year transform we take is
just on a tiny little section of audio.
But because our for because we're doing
4year transforms on such small segments,
we get poor frequency resolution. You
can count 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 eight bins,
right? Because if you have 16 things, we
only want the positive frequencies. That
means we're going to end up with eight
bins here. Eight frequency bins. And so
this is your clear trade-off between
your time and frequency resolution,
right? So small frequent small window
sizes lead to good time resolution but
very poor frequency resolution because
we lose that kind of the inner uh
details of the frequency and then vice
versa. Large window sizes lead to poor
time resolution. So we kind of lose the
um how things are changing over time but
we get a very strong frequency
resolution. And so this is the main
thing to keep in mind when you're
working with it. And so just picking a
reasonable number here is often a little
bit of a little bit of an art, but for
the most part for at least speech and
stuff like that, there's good defaults
like 4 400 seems to work pretty well. So
we're going to go with that here. Um, we
could try something else. We could say
like 1024. I'm not entirely sure. So
this is what it looks like at 1024. You
can see you get slightly better
frequency resolution, right? we these
these uh lines are more clearly marked
out of how things are changing, but we
have a little bit uh worse time
resolution. So again, it's it's a little
bit of a science, but there's good
practices for most types of data that
you're going to work out there on. So we
are good to go. Now, we did this with
the um with uh Scypi. Let's go ahead and
just do it with torch audio so it's very
clear. So in torch audio let's go ahead
and set this up. So this is going to be
a transform is going to be t dotsp
spectrogram right t dotsp spectrogram
and fft= 400 hop length is equal to 200
right so that's that's the one that I um
used earlier and we're going to do
spectrogram is going to be transform
audio we're going to take our audio
apply that transform to it and let's go
ahead and plot it and when we plot it
you end up with something like this
which obviously is not very helpful to
look at like there's Not really a lot of
information here and that's because
we're looking at the raw amplitudes and
it's very common to take the raw
amplitude amplitudes here and scale it
typically log scale it. So what we're
going to do is convert it to decibb and
so decibb very clear formula. We can
just take the log of this thing and
multiply it by 20 and we'd be good to
go. But let's just go ahead and learn a
couple of the transforms available to
you. So that's going to be db transform
is equal to t.amplitude
to decibel. Right? It's another formula
that or another method built right into
torch audio. dbsp spec is going to be
equal to db transform
spec.
And so again let's go ahead and just
plot this out.
Let's get rid of that. And now we get
something that looked like what we had
earlier, right? we have our actual
decibel values here. Um, and just like
before, if we change this to uh let's
say 1024
1024. So notice the uh frequency
resolution. It's a little bit we have
good time resolution, but frequency
resolution we can see like we have a
little bit of blurring I guess in along
the frequency dimensions. So look how
thick at these look how thick these
bands are, these frequency bands. Um, if
we change it, let's say 1024 and this
will just be half. So 512
and again do this. We end up getting
slightly better frequency resolution but
slightly worse time resolution. So what
you use kind of depends on what you're
trying to solve for and honestly what
how much frequency information is in
that data. But that's that's the main
idea. Now let's talk about MEL
spectrograms because spectrograms are
useful and they're useful in basically
any domain but most types of data has
something special that we can do with
it. and mouse spectrograms are closer to
what the human ear perceives because
it's an approximation of our auditory
perception. So the reason is that our
frequencies here are a linear scale,
right? It's basically linear like you
have zero frequency, 100, 200, 300, 400,
500, whatever it may be. We have some
linear scale here for the frequencies.
But human hearing does not work
linearly. So we need a better
approximation of that. It's not that you
couldn't use the spectrograms. is just
male spectrograms are better built for
human hearing, human speech, that sort
of stuff. And how it works is this.
Basically, we have this formula. This
was basically uh they they ran a study.
They collected a lot of data of how
people perceive audio. And then they fit
a regression model and that's where
these coefficients all come from, right?
They fit a model to it to figure it out.
And this is what it looks like this
plot. And so what it says is that notice
that when you go from 0 to 2500 hertz,
right? So when you increasing in your
frequency raw true frequency values in
the low frequency range we get a pretty
good a pretty good increase in the
frequency in the male frequency range.
On the other hand in higher frequencies
the same increases so going from 0 to
2500 led to a 0 to almost750
increase here. But that same amount of
increase from like7500
um to like 20,000 leads to a much
smaller increase in the male frequency
range. And why would that be? So let's
let's take a look.
This is this is essentially the power
law of perception. So there's a lot of
ways to think about it. Let's think
about it in terms of cars first. If
you're driving a car at 10 miles an hour
and you increase by 10 miles an hour, so
now you're driving at 20 miles an hour,
you feel like you're going faster,
right? you're feel because you've
doubled your speed. So you feel like
you're actually going faster. On the
other hand, if you're driving at 60 mph
and increase by the same 10 miles hour,
so this is now 70 mph. Going from 60 to
70 mph doesn't feel like a huge increase
because it isn't, right? It's it's
proport it's it's absolute. It's the
same. You've increased by 10, but
proportionally it's much less because
you haven't doubled it. To get that same
effect, you'd have to go from 60 mph to
120 mph, right? To double your speed.
And so this is the power law of
perception. Okay. So let's see why this
happens. So what we're going to do first
is our samples per second. Most
microphones microphones record at 44100.
So that's what we're going to use here.
And then let's do our uh frequency is
going to be 440.
Right? So this is I believe it's middle
C, but either way that's a standard um
frequency that we'll test right now.
440.
duration is going to be uh let's say 10
seconds of audio. And so then we're
going to do our t is np do
a range and it's going to go from
duration or let's do duration
times samples
per second. Right? So that's our times
um all the times that we need. And then
we can do our wave form is going to be
np do sin standard formula from before 2
* np.pi
times our um
t and this will be t / because this is
just 0 to whatever it needs to be
divided by the uh our number of samples
per second. So we get the correct
indexes. So it goes from zero to however
many seconds we have. So there we go. T
times our frequency.
And so we do plt.plot
waveform.
We'll see, you know, this waveform. Not
very helpful to see that, but we can
play it back. We can do audio. It'll be
the waveform. And our rate, our rate is
going to be the samples per second.
So you should hear that, right? That's
our sound. And what we're going to do is
let's mess with this a little bit. So
let's set the frequency to be 200 right
now. So this is our frequency.
Right? 200. Let's say we increase it by
200. Let's make it 400.
Okay. We can hear a pretty good
difference between those. Now let's do
the same thing. Let's do 1,000.
That's 1,000 hertz. But then when we do,
1200,
it's not as big of a difference. It
doesn't feel as big of a difference. And
let's do another one. Let's do um let's
do 2500.
Sorry if it's a little lou. And then
we'll do 27
uh00. So, it's a 200 increase.
It's a very little bit of increase
because perceptually it doesn't seem
like much more. And so, this is exactly
what the MEL frequency, the MEL scale
does. It it puts less of an increase in
changes in higher frequencies. And so,
our first goal is to convert this
spectrogram here to the mouse scale so
it's more accurate or closer to how
human hearing works. Luckily to do that
is pretty straightforward. We can just
use the transform from our um from our
torch audio transforms. The transform is
going to be t.m melsp spectrogram
and let's just provide it the sample
rate is again 16,000 in our audio and
fft let's just say 1024 doesn't really
matter. um hop length
is equal to 512 because before our ml
spectrogram can be created it first
needs to create the spectrogram. So
these are the spectrograms and then we
have our n mls and then this is the
number of mal bins that we want to use.
How are we going to bin these
frequencies into the different mal
groups? And that's kind of up to you.
You can have only up to so many. So you
can have nmells up to the number of
frequency bins from the FFT. So the if
your foria transform gives you 500 uh
frequency bins, then you can have up to
500 um MEL bins, but typically we use a
slightly smaller number to aggregate
that information a little bit. And so
let's just do 128 here, right? Again,
the specifics of how this all happens.
We'll implement another day. Today's
just to give you an idea of what's going
on. And 128 is a pretty typical value we
use for most um speech models. That's
where we're going with it. And there's
actually two different types of MEL
scales that are slightly different from
each other. There's Slaney and HTK. Um
we will we will just use uh Slaney
today.
So that's our transform. And so let's go
ahead. Our MEL spectrogram is just going
to be the transform on that audio which
will first compute the uh spectrogram
and then it will apply the MEL scale to
it. And then once we have that
everything else is the same. So we can
go ahead and copy it in. We're going to
convert it to decibb, right? And then
we're going to go ahead and just plot
it. And we end up with something like
this. So we get this mel scale. Notice
that it goes from 100 or 0 to about 128.
Um, and this is a better representation
of human speech.
Let's compare it to earlier. Notice that
we have a linear increase here. So all
of our frequency stuff is kind of uh all
of our frequency information is kind of
compressed down here because it really
doesn't go much higher. But we know that
as we increase in our frequency, we
should have more emphasis uh or at the
these changes in the lower frequencies
should have more emphasis. And that's
why it's essentially stretching it out a
little bit more. So your low frequency
information from here, these changes in
frequencies should be accentuated,
right? These these these differences in
these frequencies should be accentuated
more. So the male frequency essentially
just stretches them out a little bit
more. And that's why we end up with
something like this. It's just a scaling
factor. It's nothing um like nothing
crazy is going on. It's just it's mostly
just rescaling our frequency axis. But
that's it. So now that we have our MEL
spectrogram, the last part is how do we
go from this back to the audio. So
remember again to do our inverse foryear
transform which we did right here.
inverse transform. We went from the raw
4year transform, right? We passed in y
FFT back to our back into the inverse
for transform and y fft here were
complex numbers, right? So when we apply
the for transform, we get both the uh we
have both the magnitude and the phase
information incorporated in those
complex numbers. So that's the key idea.
The problem is when I mentioned here um
when we did this spectrogram here we had
both the magnitude
and the phase information. So no problem
here we could totally invert this um
invert this because this um zxx right
our our short time for transform has
complex numbers. So as long as we have
the magnitude and the phase information
we can invert it. The main issue is that
I mentioned how the phase technically is
not used and we only use the magnitude
and if you only have the magnitude the
magnitude plot then there's actually no
way to invert it not directly at least
and so we have to use a trick. If we
only have the magnitude information and
basically all neural networks or as far
as I I can tell most neural networks are
using just the magnitude spectrograms
then we need to have another trick to
invert it because we don't have the
phase that tells us the alignment of
these different frequencies
and so if we don't have it we need to
use a trick and that trick is known as
the Griffin limb algorithm. And so a a
clear place you would use this actually
is a texttospech model. So a texttospech
model is something where you provide it
some text and it generates some speech.
But most model actually not most but a
lot of models out there are not directly
generating this raw waveform. What
they're generating is this MEL
spectrogram and then given this MEL
spectrogram we can invert it to the
speech that we're interested in. So
that's that's the key idea here. In
which case if we're doing this then what
we can do then the problem is how do we
invert this when we only have the
magnitude if we only have the magnitude
mal spectrogram then we have no way to
invert it because the inverse forear
transform requires that we have both the
magnitude and the phase and so this is
what the Griffin limb algorithm
overcomes it uses essentially a back and
forth projection an iterative projection
method to retrieve the phase of the
spectrogram uh the the um the procedure
is that we start with if we don't know
what the phase of the different
frequencies are here over time then why
not just pick a random phase invert the
STFT with those random phases that
current phase guess back to the waveform
and then take the shorttime for
transform again of that rescale the
magnitude and then repeat when converge
again we're going to take a look at a
little bit of the math and the
implementation in the future of how we
actually build this but we're just going
to basically do a bunch of iterative
take a for short time for transform take
an inverse short-time for transform keep
going over and over again until our
phases converge. The reason this
actually works is because again of that
overlap add method because if I take a
short time for if I um take a fouryear
transform of this chunk right here and
then this second chunk right here and
we'll end up with this small bit of
overlap between the two and if we have
an overlap regardless of how many
foryear transforms and short-time 4year
transforms that we take and inverse for
year transforms no matter no matter how
many times you go back and forth between
the time domain and the frequency domain
these values have to be the same. And so
it's a constrained optimization
essentially where we want to basically
keep um taking the transform the 4A
transform and the inverse transform over
and over again and ensure that these
values end up converging to be the same
which will only happen when the phases
align. So that that's kind of a high
level of why it's working but we'll look
at that in more detail later on. So for
us to do this the Griffin limb algorithm
actually only works directly on the uh
original spectrogram not the mal scale.
So we have two steps. We need to take
the mouse spectrogram. We need to
unconvert it back to regular
spectrograms. And then once we have
regular spectrograms, we can apply the
Griffin limb algorithm to that to get
our final result. So let's go ahead and
just copy the part that's the same from
before. So we have here our
waveform. We have our mouse spectrogram
and we've created our mouse spectrogram.
Now here is the first takeaway. Let's go
back up here. And this is going to kind
of allude back to what we had looked at
earlier.
If we look at our um let's see here.
Let's look at the print.
Let's just print the magnitude. Print
magnitude dot actually maybe let's do it
in the next one where we do it right
here. Let's print the dbsp spec.shape.
Notice that the shape here is 513x 275.
275 is along the time dimensions, but we
have 513 here. Where did this 513 on
this spectrogram come from? Well,
remember this spectrogram used a FFT
length, the window length of 1024. So
that means we have 1024 frequency bins
in every single um chunk, right? Every
single chunk we have 1024 frequency bins
that we end up creating.
The thing is that half of those
frequency bins are negative frequency
and the other half are the positive
frequencies. We typically only care
about the positive frequencies, which is
why this has 512 + one for the DC term,
right? Zero frequency. So we have 512
plus one, so 513 frequency bins that are
had because all of the other frequency
bins that would be on the other half,
right? They'd keep going in the negative
direction. They would just be exactly
the same as this. it just be a
reflection of the same data just on the
other half and which is less interesting
to us, right? We don't really care about
the negative frequency. So, we just have
the positive frequencies. And so, that's
where this 513 comes from. And so, that
will make more sense why we need that
right here. So, now that we have this
mal spectrogram, what we want to do is
convert this male spectrogram back into
the original spectrogram. So, how do we
do that? This going to be inverse mcale
transform. It's going to be tin inverse
inverse mouse scale.
And this is going to need a couple
pieces of information. First, nftt.
How many frequency bins are there? Well,
we have 1024, but we only will be
computing for the positive ones. So,
that's going to be 512 + 1, 513. So,
that's why we have 513 here because we
only want to keep the positive and the
zero um the zero frequency term. And
then, how many mels do we have? Nls.
Well, we set that ahead of time, right?
We set 128 mls. So, it just needs to
know that, oh, the signal coming in has
128. And then, of course, we provide the
sample rate is the sample rate. And then
we provide the mouse scale that we used.
In this case, we use slaney. So, we're
going to let it know slain here. And
this will go ahead and invert our
spectrogram. So, we're going to go from
male spectrogram to regular spectrogram.
It's going to be our uh inverse
ml scale. MEL scale transform of our MEL
spectrogram.
Right? So that's our new that's our
inverted spectrogram. Nothing crazy. And
now that we have a spectrogram, notice
these are magnitudes, right? Values, but
we have no phase information. So there's
no way for us to do an actual inverse,
right? We can't do the inverse shorttime
for transform. So because we can't do
that, what we're going to do is go ahead
and use the Griffin limb algorithm to
iteratively estimate those phases and
get the reconstructed waveform. So we're
going to do Griffin
limb transform. It's going to be T.
Griffin
limb
n FFT. So how many frequency pins are
there? We know there's 1024, right?
That's what we set it to. Hop length is
going to be uh in this case it's going
to be uh 512 right we want a 1/2 as we
said it up here right 512 is our hop
length
and then how many iter this is an
iterative algorithm so how many
iterations do we want to use let's just
do 100 for now right basically it'll
keep going until convergence
and so now we can finally go ahead and
do reconstructed waveform is going to be
the griffin
limb
transform
spectrogram.
Right? So go ahead and actually apply
the Griffin limb algorithm to our
spectrogram and we'll end up with our
newly reconstructed waveform. And what
we want to do is see how they compare to
each other. So I'm going to go ahead and
plot the visual.
We had our mouse spectrogram here. We
have our reconstructed linear
spectrogram here. Now the problem is
when going from the male spectrogram to
the reconstructed linear spectrogram,
it's not a onetoone mapping because
remember it was binned together. We may
have had 512 frequency bins in the
original spectrogram, right? We can see
512 here, but because we mapped it to
128 um MEL bins, we end up losing a
little bit of information because it's
not one. multiple frequency bins can be
mapped to a single Melbin. So when we're
going the other direction, it may not
know which frequency bin to map that
Melbin back to because it's not one to
one. And so some information could be
lost here depending on how you set up
the MEL spectrogram. And then we can go
ahead and compute our um audio on the
original on our reconstructed
spectrogram.
And to do that, what we're going to do
is just go ahead and plot it. Audio
reconstructed
waveform. And we know the rate is
16,000.
And play it back. A distinct promise of
100 pounds was made to him if he would
have the child ready to hand over to
Traval. Okay, it's not bad. It sounds a
little robotic, right? But we did
reconstruct something. And this could be
an artifact of the lack of the one to
one mapping to go from MEL back to
linear spectrograms. And also of course
the the approximation errors from an
iterative algorithm of going from our
spectrogram to our um audio itself.
Let's listen to the original one again.
Um that was just reg I think I just
called it audio. So let's just do that.
A distinct promise of a 100 pounds was
made to him. That's original audio.
And so this method is okay but actually
not all that much used these days. Um
you're better off using something known
as a neural vocoder. So neural vocoder.
So Griffin limb can create a reasonable
approximation of magnitude spectrograms
to audio but it's not as good as deep
learning based methods. So there's a lot
of deep learning methods out there like
hi-fi again as one will imple implement
one day in the future. Um, and in hi-fi
again, you end up taking basically
learning a neural network to take a male
spectrogram and produce the audio
directly. And these are significantly
higher quality than something Griffin
Limb could produce. But either way,
let's go ahead and just do a summary
table here just so you can see the flow
between all the things that we did. So,
what we normally start with is a
waveform, right? A wave
form, right? That's our original data.
And there's two ways we can process
this. Either one, we do a 4year
transform, right? 4year transform. And
this is going to produce a frequency
and the waveform is time
time domain, right? Time domain data.
And this is going to uh produce
frequency uh domain
data, right? Fully frequency. So in this
case, we've lost all of that temporal
information. And this is not really a
pathway we normally take, especially for
speech processing and audio processing
for neural networks because we want to
have a mix of time and frequency domain.
So let's go ahead and get rid of this
cuz we're not going to really look at
it. What we do instead is something
known as the short time. Let's do it
here. Short time for your transform,
which will end up producing something
known as the spectrogram,
right? Which is kind of like a picture,
right? a picture
of audio, right? Gives you an image of
the audio essentially. It's a good way
to think about it. So, we have our short
time for transform. We give it to a
spectrogram.
Now that we have our short time for
transform and we produce spectrogram, we
typically for speech, for speech
specifically, we'll do a MEL scale,
right? Make it uh closer to human
perception, right? So for speech and
human listening and stuff like that, we
typically convert it to a MEL scale. And
so you'll end up with a MEL
spectrogram.
Unfortunately, this mapping from
spectrogram to MEL spectrogram is not
necessarily a one:1 mapping, right? So
just keep that in mind. Now, how do we
go back? Well, we can go back from the
mal spectrogram
to the spectrogram using an inverse
mal scale, right? We take an inverse mal
scale to get back from there to there.
And the spectrogram assuming this is
just magnitude, right? Magnitude because
we don't have the phase information. We
can approximate the waveform
using the Griffin
limb algorithm, right? That's our
approximation. So, this is an approx.
And these are kind of the main tools
you'll be using for speech processing.
So, it's helpful when working with
neural networks. There's basically two
ways. There are more, but the main two
ways you're going to see going about is
that either either you're passing raw
waveforms. So in the wavetovac
architecture that we'll implement in the
future, we'll pass it a raw waveform. So
the model takes raw waveform audio and
learn something from it. Um other
architectures like hi-fi again which is
a vocoder or even whisper um or a lot of
the TTS models to those you pass
spectrogram. So instead of passing raw
waveforms you pass it a spectrogram and
then it does some type of neural network
stuff on the spectrogram instead. So
we're going to be implementing deep
speech 2 which will be using
spectrograms. Then we'll be implementing
waved effect which will be using raw
audio um all in the future. This is just
supposed to be a highlevel overview of
kind of some of the different tools we
use for audio processing using Torch
Audio. Um, and so I will see y'all in
the next